# Damage and Healing by Spellcasting
<!-- source: Sidherun PHB 2_8_2026.docx -->

Many different spells cast impact the target and do (sometimes considerable) damage. Conversely, characters may wish to heal damage done to fellow players, non-player characters or other characters in the narrative. To determine damage and/or healing generated by the spells cast, the simple math below is applied:

- For each spell level used, *one point of magical energy (**mana**)* is used
- A spell caster may decide to use ***less mana*** than their level equates to if they wish
  - This may result in lower damage and/or healing
    - Example(s):
      - A player may wish to cast a level 1 heal on a friendly character that needs limited healing. The player would still consider the character and target level, and, if the roll is successful, would only use 1 ***mana. In this example, a level 5 character casting a heal, the target would only receive 6 points of health back***
- For other scenarios, ask your GM, who will base damage on scenario, narrative and creativity of the ideas involved
- SPECIAL NOTES on Healing:
  - A 'friendly' character may wish to accept the energy presented to them by the healing arts. In this case, the caster will not need to consider a Defense Modifier when casting.
  - When casting a heal on oneself, the target is always level 1 (unless modified by the GM)
  - Over-healing may produce waste
    - Example(s):
      - A level 5 character down 2 hit points who uses a level 1 spell to heal themselves:
        - Would use 1 **mana**
        - Would heal 2 hit points (the remaining 4 are wasted)

Example(s):

- Martinuk, born in the woods to the far north of Quin'tiel, grew to manhood within the shadows of the Great Trees of abundance near the Eledhel's Deep forests. Having learned healing from the great weavers of the Eledhel, Martinuk knew of the healing arts, but was unable to transfer that power to others, only for his own need. After a great skirmish with his friends against a Dark Initiate Coven, Martinuk found himself in distress. He knew the only other person who could help him was busy helping the unconscious barbarian, Kleg, so he decides to try and use his knowledge of the forces around him to heal his wounded knee.
- Jay, playing Martinuk, wants to heal himself, as he's down almost 20 hit points worth of damage after fighting a group of which creatures called the Dark Initiates. Reviewing the Spell Matrix table, Jay knows he uses his own level (5) with a target level of (1) to cast. This gives him a target of 95 (You always fail a spell on rolls of 96-00). Jay rolls a 13 and decides to use 3 **mana** to heal himself for 18 (3x6), leaving Martinuk damaged for 2 points, which he'll keep for now.
