# Archetype Examples
<!-- source: Sidherun PHB 2_8_2026.docx -->

**Acrobat –** A nimble and spry being with high energy and an insatiable curiosity, you were born with unbounding energy, a willingness to engage with others, and a need to be inconstant motion. Whether tumbling, or rolling, jumping, or dodging, climbing, or falling, your need to stay in constant motion has helped you get into (and stay out of) trouble for most of your life. Your nimble feet, strong hands and arms, and ability to contort into various small places has landed you in the local faire, a traveling circus, a thieves' guild, and in the local city guard.

**Barbarian –** Your eyes pop open. When did you drift off? After climbing all day in the unclimbable mountains, you needed some sleep to continue. By The Way, why have you given in to weakness. Your tribe awaits your return (or to find your carcass) before they will continue from the lower basin. You feel as though you have been climbing and fighting for many moon cycles, and, while your body aches, you will fight your way down the hill. Looking down at the mangled stump at the bottom of your leg, you know you can fight through the pain of the injury, but will the Shaman be able to repair what is left of your foot. Patting the bear pelt on the head thrown across your shoulder, you know you will be able make it. You know The Way will guide you back to the tribe. Be like the water and flow homeward...

**Conjurer –** The pain your legs was lost to the hours of sitting in this crooked position. The chanting of your brothers around you and the blinding lights from the central carvings in your intricate ritual have taken so long to create and execute that you wonder how long you have been at it. You and your fellow initiates have been told the power of your conjuring will help the Chosen One to pick one of you to move forward with training. What does that mean for the rest of the coven-initiates? No one knows, but you don't recall hearing from your older brother, who performed the ritual last growing season...

**Druid -** *Badger* approaches and whispers in your ear, 'Your long duty is fulfilled, brother. Go forth into the world now and experience beyond your grove'. Your long legs are stiff, as you rise to tower over the Great Druid. Your chest held high, you nod and withdraw from the only surroundings you have experienced for the past 500 years. "Your watch passes", the common refrain from the others gathered in your grove as you proudly exit the circle, stopping only to look back as the fawn who now stands in your stead looks to you one last time for guidance. "Your watch begins" you stammer, as your eyes lock on with Greenmeadow's, the young Centaur who will be your heir. "Now the real test begins", you think to yourself as you walk beyond the entrance to your home, and think about how you will make your way north, to the Druid's Grove, to gather your Dwarven Guardsman partner and make way into the world again...

**Enlightened –** Seated upon the large, silk cushions, Marklok grunts some sort of contented sound after sipping from his large horn-mug. The piping hot brewed leaves within the horn still sizzle from the boil, and seeing the likes of such a large, fat ogre across from you, it takes a moment to fully realize the luck you have had. As a child, you always could see the faint lines connecting everything, but never dreamt it was more than just dazzle or (as mum told you) eye problems. "It's too much sun", she'd say, as you struggled to understand the connections. When Marklok came to your village, northeast of Quin'tiel, your family cowered in fear. Not just because of the show of force (an Enlightened had never come to your town), but the size of the leader – an Ogre of unusual.... girth.... When Marklok asked for the elder to come forward, no one knew who to point towards, so your father, ever needing the spotlight, stepped out in front to announce himself. When Marklok saw you behind your father, he pointed. Looking you square in the eyes, he said, "Do you see the lines, boy?". Horrified, your mother was the first to piece it together. Screaming, she fell to her knees and begged the Ogre to take her instead, but Marklok, ever wise, simply walked over to your mom, gently taking her hand, and said, "Mother. He's special. You will never want for anything again, knowing your baby will walk among the world, Enlightened." He then looked at one of the acolytes and they dropped a chest at your father's feet. "There is enough there for the entire town to live comfortably for all your days. You will see him in a year and will be able to stay in contact as you all agree. For now, boy, say your goodbye's, and then come to my litter. We have much to discuss and little time to do it..."
